The series follows the life of a boy named Harry Potter . In the first book , Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone , 
Harry lives in a cupboard under the stairs in the house of the Dursleys , his aunt , uncle and cousin . The Dursleys consider themselves perfectly normal , 
but at the age of eleven , Harry discovers that he is a wizard . He meets a half-giant named Hagrid who invites him to attend the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . 
Harry learns that as a baby , his parents were murdered by the dark wizard Lord Voldemort . When Voldemort attempted to kill Harry , 
his curse rebounded and Harry survived with a lightning-shaped scar on his forehead .
Harry becomes a student at Hogwarts and is sorted into Gryffindor House . He gains the friendship of Ron Weasley , a member of a large but poor wizarding family , 
and Hermione Granger , a witch of non-magical , or Muggle , parentage . Harry encounters the school's potions master , Severus Snape , 
who displays a dislike for him  ; the rich pure-blood Draco Malfoy whom he develops an enmity with ; and the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher , 
Quirinus Quirrell , who turns out to be allied with Lord Voldemort . The first book concludes with Harry's confrontation with Voldemort , who , 
in his quest to regain a body , yearns to gain the power of the Philosopher's Stone , a substance that bestows everlasting life .
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets describes Harry's second year at Hogwarts . Students are attacked and petrified by an unknown creature ; 
wizards of Muggle parentage are the primary targets . The attacks appear related to the Chamber of Secrets , a fifty-year-old mystery at the school . 
Harry discovers an ability to speak the snake language Parseltongue , which he learns is rare and associated with the Dark Arts . 
When Hermione is attacked , Harry and Ron uncover the chamber's secrets and enter it . Harry discovers that the chamber was opened by Ron's younger sister , 
Ginny Weasley , who was possessed by an old diary in her belongings . The memory of Tom Marvolo Riddle , Voldemort's younger self , 
resided inside the diary and unleashed the basilisk , an ancient monster that kills those who make direct eye contact . 
Harry draws the Sword of Gryffindor from the Sorting Hat , slays the basilisk and destroys the diary .

In the third novel , Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban , 
Harry learns that he is targeted by Sirius Black , an escaped convict who allegedly assisted in his parents' murder . 
As Harry struggles with his reaction to the dementors – creatures guarding the school that feed on despair – he reaches out to Remus Lupin , 
a new professor who teaches him the Patronus charm . On a windy night , Ron is dragged by a black dog into the Shrieking Shack ; Harry and Hermione follow . 
The dog is revealed to be Sirius Black . Lupin enters the shack and explains that Black was James Potter's best friend ; he was framed by Peter Pettigrew , 
who hides as Ron's pet rat , Scabbers . As the full moon rises , Lupin transforms into a werewolf and bounds away ; the group chase after him but are surrounded by dementors . 
They are saved by a mysterious figure who casts a stag Patronus . This is later revealed to be a future version of Harry , who traveled back in time with Hermione using the Time Turner . 
The duo help Sirius escape on a Hippogriff .

In Harry's fourth year of school ( detailed in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire ) , he is unwillingly entered in the Triwizard Tournament , 
a contest between schools of witchcraft and wizardry . Harry is Hogwarts' second participant after Cedric Diggory , an unusual occurrence that causes his friends to distance themselves from him.
He competes against schools Beauxbaton and Durmstrang with the help of the new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor , 
Alastor " Mad-Eye " Moody . Harry claims the Triwizard Cup with Cedric , but in doing so is teleported to a graveyard where Voldemort's supporters convene . 
Moody reveals himself be to Barty Crouch , Jr , a Death Eater . Harry manages to escape , but Cedric is killed and Voldemort is resurrected using Harry's blood .
In the fifth book , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , the Ministry of Magic refuses to believe that Voldemort has returned . 
Dumbledore re-activates the Order of the Phoenix , a secret society to counter Voldemort  ; meanwhile , the Ministry appoints Dolores Umbridge as the High Inquisitor of Hogwarts . 
Umbridge bans the Defense Against the Dark Arts ; in response , Hermione and Ron form " Dumbledore's Army " , a secret group where Harry teaches what Umbridge forbids . 
Harry is punished for disobeying Umbridge , and dreams of a dark corridor in the Ministry of Magic . Near the end of the book , Harry falsely dreams of Sirius being tortured ; 
he races to the Ministry where he faces Death Eaters . The Order of the Phoenix saves the teenagers' lives , but Sirius is killed . 
A prophecy concerning Harry and Voldemort is then revealed : one must die at the hands of the other .
In the sixth book , Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince , Snape teaches Defense Against the Dark Arts while Horace Slughorn becomes the Potions master . 
Harry finds an old textbook with annotations by the Half-Blood Prince , due to which he achieves success in Potions class . Harry also takes lessons with Dumbledore , viewing memories about the early life of Voldemort in a device called a Pensieve . 
Harry learns from a drunken Slughorn that he used to teach Tom Riddle , and that Voldemort divided his soul into pieces , creating a series of Horcruxes . 
Harry and Dumbledore travel to a distant lake to destroy a Horcrux ; they succeed , but Dumbledore weakens . 
On their return , they find Draco Malfoy and Death Eaters attacking the school . 
The book ends with the killing of Dumbledore by Professor Snape , the titular Half-Blood Prince .
In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , the seventh novel in the series , Lord Voldemort gains control of the Ministry of Magic . 
Harry , Ron and Hermione learn about the Deathly Hallows , legendary items that lead to mastery over death . 
The group infiltrate the ministry , where they steal a locket Horcrux , and visit Godric's Hollow , where they are attacked by Nagini . 
A silver doe Patronus leads them to the Sword of Gryffindor , with which they destroy the locket . 
They steal a Horcrux from Gringotts and travel to Hogwarts , culminating in a battle with Death Eaters . 
Snape is killed by Voldemort out of paranoia , but lends Harry his memories before he dies . 
Harry learns that Snape was always loyal to Dumbledore , and that he himself is a Horcrux . 
Harry surrenders to Voldemort and dies . The defenders of Hogwarts continue to fight on; Harry is resurrected , faces Voldemort and kills him .
An epilogue titled " Nineteen Years Later " describes the lives of the surviving characters and the impact of Voldemort's death . 
Harry and Ginny are married with three children , and Ron and Hermione are married with two children .